updates to grammer and spelling (#8492)
prometheus/prometheus: docs/querying/basics.md

## Examples

> This document is a Promethues basic language reference. For learning, it may be easier to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This document is a Prometheus basic language reference. For learning, it may be easier to
```

> * **String** - a simple string value; currently unused

Reviewer: note to self: start another PR due to native histograms experimental feature where there's a new type

### String literals

> Strings literals are designated by single quotes, double quotes or backticks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
String literals are designated by single quotes, double quotes or backticks.
```

PromQL follows the same [escaping rules as
Go](https://golang.org/ref/spec#String_literals). For string literals in single or double quotes, a
backslash begins an escape sequence, which may be followed by `a`, `b`, `f`,

> `n`, `r`, `t`, `v` or `\`.  Characters can be produced using octal

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`n`, `r`, `t`, `v` or `\`.  Specific characters can be provided using octal
```

> (`\nnn`) or hexadecimal (`\xnn`, `\unnnn` and `\Unnnnnnnn`) notations.  

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
(`\nnn`) or hexadecimal (`\xnn`, `\unnnn` and `\Unnnnnnnn`) notations.
```

### Instant vector selectors

> Instant vector selectors allow the selection of a set of time series (in a time range query) 
> and a single sample value for each at a given timestamp (in an instant query).  In the simplest

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instant vector selectors allow the selection of a set of time series and a
single sample value for each at a given timestamp (instant in time).  In the simplest
```

> form, only a metric name is specified, which results in an instant vector

Reviewer 2: This change doesn't seem right to me.  The original is trying to define "instant vector" as a thing independent of the query it appears in.  "timestamp (instant)" means the word "timestamp" means the same as the word "instant".

Reviewer: I guess for some the word instant is overloaded, so we could say `(instant in time)` or just not have it there?

Reviewer: Or point in time, which might be more English

    http_requests_total{job="prometheus",group="canary"}

> It is also possible to negatively match a label value or match label values

Reviewer 2: very low-value change

Label matchers that match empty label values also select all time series that
do not have the specific label set at all. It is possible to have multiple matchers for the same label name.

For example, given the dataset:

    http_requests_total
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-a"}
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-b"}
    http_requests_total{environment="development"}

The query `http_requests_total{environment=""}` would match and return:

    http_requests_total
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-a"}
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-b"}

and would exclude:

    http_requests_total{environment="development"}

Multiple matchers can be used for the same label name; they all must pass for a result to be returned. 

The query:

    http_requests_total{replica!="rep-a",replica=~"rep.*"}

> Would them match:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Would then match:
```

Label matchers that match empty label values also select all time series that
do not have the specific label set at all. It is possible to have multiple matchers for the same label name.

> An example dataset may include:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, given the dataset:
```

    http_requests_total
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-a"}
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-b"}
    http_requests_total{environment="development"}

The query `http_requests_total{environment=""}` would match and return:

    http_requests_total
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-a"}
    http_requests_total{replica="rep-b"}

and would exclude:

    http_requests_total{environment="development"}

Regex-matches are fully anchored, meaning the pattern will only match if the whole string matches.

    http_requests_total{replica=~"^rep.*"} # Good!

>     http_requests_total{replica=~"^rep"}   # No match

Reviewer 2: This point has already been added on line 116.  Suggest to drop here.

> 
> Regex-matches are fully anchored, meaning the pattern will only match if the whole string matches.
> 
>     http_requests_total{replica=~"^rep.*"} # Good!
>     http_requests_total{replica=~"^rep"}   # No match

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

* `s` - seconds
* `m` - minutes
* `h` - hours

> * `d` - days - assuming a day has always 24h

Reviewer 3: This is needed. It means that we do not take DST, Leap hours, into consideration.

Author: I agree, but the adverb "always" should be in front of the verb it is modifying, in this case: 'has'.

assuming a day always has 24h

* `w` - weeks - assuming a week has 7d
* `y` - years - assuming a year has 365d

Time durations can be combined by concatenation. Units must be ordered from the

> longest to the shortest. A given unit must only appear once in the time duration.

Reviewer 3: Why changing this?

Author: These are small, but here are my thoughts:

It's an independent clause (a self-sustaining thought), which is then followed by a modifier.

The word "the" instead of "a" overloads subject defined in the first sentence.

* `ms` - milliseconds
* `s` - seconds

> * `m` - minutes - assuming a minute always has 60s<sup>1</sup>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `m` - minutes
```

* `ms` - milliseconds
* `s` - seconds

> * `m` - minutes - assuming a minute always has 60s<sup>1</sup>

Reviewer 2: unnecessary

Reviewer: isn't the point that there is no account for leap seconds ?

Reviewer 2: Yes, who knows about leap seconds?  There haven't been any since 2016; I understand there will never be any more leap seconds. [Wikipedia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Leap_second#International_proposals_for_elimination_of_leap_seconds)

We could perhaps put on some 'concepts' page the detailed definition of time that Prometheus is based on; I do not think it belongs on the "querying basics" page.

    rate(http_requests_total[5m] offset 1w)

> When querying for samples in the past, a negative offset will enable temporal comparisons forward in time:

Reviewer 3: This is not part of this PR.

Author: Yup, this is my error.  I did a cp and didn't remove this update.

Note that the `@` modifier always needs to follow the selector
immediately, i.e. the following would be correct:

>     sum( http_requests_total{method="GET"} @ 1609746000 ) // GOOD.

Reviewer 3: Please do not change the formatting here, I think it reads better without the spaces.

Author: I would really like to pull attention out to the new placement of the parenthesis.  I agree that the spaces distract.

What do you think about this:  Could we color the outer sum parenthesis to draw attention to them?

While the following would be *incorrect*:

>     sum( http_requests_total{method="GET"} ) @ 1609746000 // INVALID.

Reviewer 3: Please do not change the formatting here, I think it reads better without the spaces.

Author: Same as above, agreed.

The same works for range vectors. This returns the 5-minute rate that
`http_requests_total` had at `2021-01-04T07:40:00+00:00`:

    rate(http_requests_total[5m] @ 1609746000)

> `@` modifier supports all representation of numeric literals described

Reviewer 3: nan and +inf are float too, but nan is not numeric.

above within the limits of `int64`. This can be used with the `offset` modifier, 
where the offset is applied relative to the `@` modifier time.  The results are the
same irrespective of which modifier is written first.

These two queries will produce the same result.

    # offset after @
    http_requests_total @ 1609746000 offset 5m
    # offset before @
    http_requests_total offset 5m @ 1609746000

This modifier is disabled by default since it breaks the invariant that PromQL

> does not look ahead of the evaluation time for samples. This can be enabled by setting

Reviewer 3: Why repeating this?

Author: Thought:

Replacing the word "This" in place of "It" continues the use of the established subject.

Author: Yes, you are right, "it" is better as it is a continuation of the previous subject.

    rate(http_requests_total[5m] @ 1609746000)

The `@` modifier supports all representations of numeric literals described above.

> It works with the `offset` modifier where the offset is applied relative to the `@`

Reviewer 2: "works" implies it is typical to combine them, whereas "can be used" says it is possible but not the norm.
In this case I think "can be used" is better.

Also I think a new paragraph at "It" would help to separate the description of `@` from the combination of `@` and `offset` which follows.

The timestamps at which to sample data, during a query, are selected
independently of the actual present time series data. This method principally supports
cases like aggregation (`sum`, `avg`, and so on), where multiple aggregated
time series do not precisely precisely in time. Because of their independence,
Prometheus needs to assign a value at those timestamps for each relevant time
series. It does so by taking the newest sample before this timestamp.

If a target scrape or rule evaluation no longer returns a sample for a time
series that was previously present, this time series will be marked as stale.
If a target is removed, the previously retrieved time series will be marked as
stale soon after removal.

If a query is evaluated at a sampling timestamp after a time series is marked
as stale, then no value is returned for that time series. If new samples are
subsequently ingested for that time series, they will be returned as expected.

A time series will go stale when they're no longer exposed / the target no
longer exists. This effectively means that time series "disappears" from graphs 
at the times of their latest collected sample, and they will not show up in queries

> over a time interval they are marked stale.

Reviewer 2: Both "target no longer exists" and "5 minutes" behaviours are still in Prometheus, although the latter is seen mostly with targets that set explicit timestamps.
But we should document both, not erase one.

Reviewer: i've removed the change

Reviewer: updated with your suggestion please take a look

### Staleness

The timestamps at which to sample data, during a query, are selected

> independently of the actual present time series data. This is mainly to support

Reviewer 2: I don't think this is correct.  I think an instant query will give you actual timestamps from the underlying series, unless you aggregate the data in which case I don't know what it will do.
A range query never gives timestamps from the underlying series; they are always a multiple of `step` away from `end`.
(and subqueries are a multiple of their `step` away from the epoch, although I don't understand why)

> independently of the actual present time series data. This is mainly to support

Reviewer: Arrrrrggg, I linked the right thing but wrote `query selector` instead of `vector selector` . Updated suggestion. Perhaps it would help if these weren't so similar in the first place.

> independently of the actual present time series data. This method principally supports

Reviewer: ```suggestion
independently of the actual present time series data. This is mainly to support
```

cases like aggregation (`sum`, `avg`, and so on), where multiple aggregated
time series do not precisely align in time. Because of their independence,
Prometheus needs to assign a value at those timestamps for each relevant time

> series. It does so by taking the newest sample before this timestamp.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
series. It does so by taking the newest sample before this timestamp in the lookback period.
The lookback period is 5 minutes by default.
```

### Staleness

The timestamps at which to sample data, during a query, are selected
independently of the actual present time series data. This method principally supports
cases like aggregation (`sum`, `avg`, and so on), where multiple aggregated

> time series do not precisely precisely in time. Because of their independence,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
time series do not precisely align in time. Because of their independence,
```

Prometheus needs to assign a value at those timestamps for each relevant time
series. It does so by taking the newest sample before this timestamp.

If a target scrape or rule evaluation no longer returns a sample for a time
series that was previously present, this time series will be marked as stale.
If a target is removed, the previously retrieved time series will be marked as
stale soon after removal.

If a query is evaluated at a sampling timestamp after a time series is marked
as stale, then no value is returned for that time series. If new samples are
subsequently ingested for that time series, they will be returned as expected.

> A time series will go stale when they're no longer exposed / the target no
> longer exists. This effectively means that time series "disappears" from graphs 
> at the times of their latest collected sample, and they will not show up in queries
> over a time interval they are marked stale.

Reviewer: Let's restore this

```suggestion
If no sample is found (by default) 5 minutes before a sampling timestamp,
no value is returned for that time series at this point in time. This
effectively means that time series "disappear" from graphs at times where their
latest collected sample is older than 5 minutes or after they are marked stale.
```

### Staleness

The timestamps at which to sample data, during a query, are selected

> independently of the actual present time series data. This method principally supports

Reviewer 2: This statement about timestamps is not universally true, and so we should not make it here.
I think it's true for all range queries, and for instant queries that do not aggregate.

Separately, changing "mainly" to "principally" is unnecessary.

Reviewer: Reading through the rest of the document and after watching https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=xIAEEQwUBXQ&t=497s the nth time I think we should just call out the fact that instant vector selectors and range vector selectors work differently and not try to explain here again, because that is redundant and can lead to faulty documentation later if things get out of sync, making proposal.

still takes too long to graph ad-hoc, pre-record it via a [recording
rule](../configuration/recording_rules.md#recording-rules).

> This consideration is especially relevant for Prometheus's query language, where a bare

Reviewer 2: unnecessary

> This consideration is especially relevant for Prometheus's query language, where a bare

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is especially relevant for Prometheus's query language, where a bare
```

metric name selector like `api_http_requests_total` could expand to thousands
of time series with different labels. Also, keep in mind that expressions that

> aggregate over many number of time series samples will generate load on the server even if the

Reviewer 2: "many number" is not English.

> output is only a small number of time series samples. This is similar to how it would

Reviewer 2: incorrect change

> of time series with different labels. Also, keep in mind that expressions that
> aggregate over many number of time series samples will generate load on the server even if the
> output is only a small number of time series samples. This is similar to how it would

Reviewer: ```suggestion
of time series with different labels. Also, keep in mind that expressions that
aggregate over many time series will generate load on the server even if the
output is only a small number of time series. This is similar to how it would
```
